British National Overseas Visas: Settlement Rules

Chris Curtis (Milton Keynes North) (Lab)
11. Whether she plans to extend the qualifying settlement period for people with British national overseas visas.

The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Seema Malhotra)
This Government are firmly committed to supporting existing members of the Hong Kong community in the United Kingdom and those who may come here in future. The new rules on earned settlement will be subject to consultation. Following that consultation we will outline the way in which the new rules will operate, explaining, for instance, which immigration routes they will affect and when the changes will come in.

Chris Curtis
Many of my constituents came to the UK from Hong Kong under the BNO visa scheme in search of safety, freedom and opportunity. They have shared with me their concerns about how the uncertainty involved in the changes in the visa system might affect their future here. Can the Minister provide reassurance that those on BNO visas, in Milton Keynes and throughout the country, will continue to have security, stability and a clear route to permanent settlement?

Seema Malhotra
My hon. Friend is a strong and powerful advocate for members of the Hong Kong community in his constituency and throughout the UK. We recognise those concerns, and we are taking steps to ensure that BNO visa holders have an opportunity to share their views during the consultation on the new earned settlement and citizenship rules. As I have said, following that consultation the Government will outline the way in which the new rules will operate and the immigration routes that they will affect. Given the ambitious nature of these proposals, it is essential that we fully understand their impact on all affected groups before making any final decisions. In the meantime, the current rules for settlement under the BNO route will continue to apply.

Pippa Heylings (South Cambridgeshire) (LD)
Will the Minister clear up, once and for all, the further confusion over the proposed changes to the settlement period from five to 10 years? Will she clarify for the BNO visa holders living in my constituency whether the changes will be applied retrospectively or only prospectively, and will she confirm that those who are already building their lives in the UK and working in important sectors in my constituency will not see their pathway to settlement unfairly changed mid-journey?

Seema Malhotra
The BNO route reflects the UK’s historic and moral commitment to the people of Hong Kong who chose to retain their ties to the UK by taking up BNO status. As I have outlined, we will have a consultation. We will ensure that BNO visa holders have the opportunity to share their views during that consultation, and we will listen to those views very closely.

